@article{atkinson,
  title={Ethnography and participant observation},
  author={Atkinson, Paul and Hammersley, Martyn and others},
  journal={Handbook of qualitative research},
  volume={1},
  pages={248--261},
  year={1994}
}

Ethnography and Participant Observation
Paul Atkinson
Martyn Hammersley


File: etnography and partic. observation - atkinson-hammersley.pdf

Annotation summary:

--- Page 1 ---

However, although it is important to recognize the variation to be found in the roles adopted by observers, this simple dichotomy is not very useful, not least because it seems to imply that the nonparticipant observer plays no recognized role at all. This can be the case, but it need not be. More subtle is the widely used fourfold typology: complete observer, observer as participant, participant as observer and complete participant. (atkinson, 248)


--- Page 2 ---

Rectangle (red), 1. 4. 2013 21:25, Jan Martinek

Moreover, it has been argued that in a sense all social research is a form of participant observation because we cannot study the social world without being part of it. (Hammerskey & Atkinson, 1983). From this point of view participant observation is not a particular research technique but a mode of being-in-the-world characteristic of researchers.

Both etnography and participant observation have been claimed to represent a uniquely humanistic, intepretive approach, as opposed to supposedly "scientific" and "positivist" positions. (aktinson, 249)

--- Page 6 ---

Rectangle (red), 1. 4. 2013 21:25, Jan Martinek

Another area of disagreement and debate that hase become of great salience in recent years is the question of the relationship between ethnographic research and social and political practice. (Už Durkheim chtěl přispět modernímu člověku, ačkoli studovat Elementary forms of Religious life, http://durkheim.uchicago.edu/Summaries/forms.html) In the past, and probably still today, most etnography has been directed toward contributing to disciplinary knowledge rather than toward solving practical problems. Although such work may ultimately contribute knowledge of wide public relevance, this contribution has not usually been very immediate or specific. Furthermore, the knowledge produced has often been presented as valuable for its own sake as much as for any instrumental value it has. (atkinson, 253)


--- Page 9 ---

Rectangle (red), 1. 4. 2013 21:25, Jan Martinek

It argued that paradox lies at the heart of the ethnographic endeavor and of "the etnography" as a textual product. On the one hand is the ethnographer's epistemoogical, personal, and moral commitment to his or her hosts. The image–often, the reality—of prolonged immersion in "the field" and the emphasis on participant observation commit the ethnographer to a shared social world. He or she has become a "stranger" or "marginal native" in order to embark upon a process of a cultural learining that is predicated on a degree of "surrender" to "the Other" (see Wolff, 1964). The epistemology of participant observation rests on the principle of interaction and the "reciprocity of perspectives" between social actors. The rhetoric is thus egalitarian: observer and observed as inhabitants of a shared social and cultural field, their respective cultures different but equal, and capable of mutual recognition by virtue of a shared humanity. (atkinson, 256)

Rectangle (red), 1. 4. 2013 21:25, Jan Martinek

The postmodern author seeks to dissolve that disjuncture between the observer and the observed. The trope of "participant observation", which captures the ambivalence of distance and familiarity, is replaced by one of "dialogue", showing "the cooperative and collaborative nature of the ethnographic situation" (Tyler, 1986, p. 126). (atkinson, 256)


(report generated by GoodReader)
